Developer's Guide
=================

Description of Branches
-----------------------

There are several primary repository branches
for specific development tracks.

main
____
This is the stable release branch.
It is updated from the *develop* branch
and tagged prior to each release.
The melodies-monet conda package is created from *main*.

develop
_______
This is the parent branch in which
to consolidate the various development tracks.
General practice, when working within the central repository,
is to create a working branch, branched from *develop*,
with a naming convention such as *develop_topic*.
The *develop_topic* branches are merged back to *develop*
via pull requests.
Forks of the central repository should follow the same
branching conventions.

.. _dev-install-instructions:

Setting up your development environment
---------------------------------------

In order to prepare for developing MELODIES MONET,
we clone the repositories and create a conda environment that references them.

.. note::
   If you are installing MELODIES MONET on NCAR Casper or NOAA Hera
   follow these machine specific instructions instead.

   - :ref:`NCAR Casper <appendix/machine-specific-install:NCAR HPC Derecho/Casper>`
   - :ref:`NOAA Hera <appendix/machine-specific-install:NOAA HPC Hera>`

.. important::
   The instructions below are for cloning a repository using SSH.
   If you prefer, you can also clone the monet, monetio, and
   MELODIES-MONET repositories using HTTPS [#clone]_.

To install MELODIES MONET on your laptop or on HPC machines in general follow 
these instructions:
 
(a) Set up a conda environment with all the dependencies, including MONET and 
    MONETIO::

       $ conda create --name melodies-monet python=3.9
       $ conda activate melodies-monet
       $ conda install -y -c conda-forge pyyaml pandas=1 'matplotlib-base<3.9' monet monetio netcdf4 wrf-python typer rich pooch jupyterlab

(b) Clone [#clone]_ and link the latest development versions of MONET and MONETIO from GitHub to
    your conda environment::

       $ git clone git@github.com:noaa-oar-arl/monet.git
       $ cd monet
       $ git checkout develop
       $ pip install --force-reinstall --no-deps --editable .

       $ git clone git@github.com:noaa-oar-arl/monetio.git
       $ cd monetio
       $ git checkout develop
       $ pip install --force-reinstall --no-deps --editable .

(c) Clone [#clone]_ and link the latest development version of the MELODIES MONET::

       $ git clone git@github.com:NOAA-CSL/MELODIES-MONET.git
       $ cd MELODIES-MONET
       $ git checkout develop
       $ pip install --force-reinstall --no-deps --editable .


How to incorporate updates to MELODIES MONET
--------------------------------------------

In order to contribute code to MELODIES MONET, you will need to fork the
repository, make changes on your fork, and submit a pull request with your
changes. 

(a) Fork the GitHub repository to your own GitHub account
    using the "Fork" button near the top right:

    https://github.com/NOAA-CSL/MELODIES-MONET

    .. note::
       You can pull updates from the main NOAA repository
       by using the "Fetch Upstream" button on your fork.
       Alternatively: [#clone]_ ::

          $ git remote add upstream git@github.com:NOAA-CSL/MELODIES-MONET.git
          $ git pull upstream main
          $ git push origin main

(b) Navigate on your working machine
    to where you would like to keep the MELODIES-MONET code
    (e.g. in your work location) and clone [#clone]_ your fork::

       $ git clone git@github.com:$GitHubUsername/$ForkName.git

(c) Checkout the develop branch --- you need to do this with the remote branch
    as well as create a local tracking branch::

       $ git checkout origin/develop
       $ git checkout develop

    Then all development work will be in the ``melodies_monet`` folder. ::

       $ cd melodies_monet

(d) Make changes to your fork.

(e) Submit a pull request back to the main MELODIES MONET repository with your
    changes. 


Contributions to the Docs
-------------------------

If you add a component to MELODIES MONET, please follow the instructions below 
to update the readthedocs user guide. 

This User's Guide has been generated by the Sphinx documentation system.
This requires adding the following packages to your conda environment in
order to build the HTML docs.

Either use the ``docs/environment-docs.yml`` file [#env]_
from the MELODIES MONET repository,
or add the following packages to your conda environment manually::

    $ conda install -y -c conda-forge sphinx sphinx_rtd_theme myst-nb sphinx-design sphinx-click sphinx-togglebutton typer

The restructured text sources (rst) are located
in the MELODIES-MONET/docs folders.
The rst files may be edited and new files added
to document any package modifications
or new MELODIES MONET components.

To build the HTML docs::

    $ cd docs
    $ make clean
    $ make html

The generated HTML will be created in ``docs/_build/html``,
with ``docs/_build/html/index.html`` the main page that can be
viewed in any browser.

Please see the `MELODIES-MONET Documentation <https://github.com/orgs/NOAA-CSL/projects/6>`_ 
project on GitHub to learn about current and future development.


.. _clone-notes:
.. [#clone] Note that in order to do an SSH clone,
   e.g. ::

      $ git clone git@github.com:noaa-oar-arl/monet.git

   you must have already
   `added an SSH key <https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account>`__
   to your GitHub account for your current machine.
   If you are new to GitHub, check out
   `this GitHub tutorial <https://jlord.us/git-it/>`__.
   We recommend the SSH method, but if you don't add an SSH key
   you can still clone the repositories via HTTPS, e.g. ::

       $ git clone https://github.com/noaa-oar-arl/monet.git


.. [#env] That is,
   use::

      $ conda env update -n melodies-monet -f docs/environment-docs.yml

   to update your existing conda environment,
   or::

      $ conda env create -f docs/environment-docs.yml

   to create a new conda environment (``melodies-monet-docs``).
